# 3. React-Table Documentation 

[Return to React Outline](0.Outline.md)

The table component is built using 

- [react-table](https://react-table.tanstack.com/): For the table logic such as filtering, sorting, checkbox, pagination
- [material-ui](https://material-ui.com/): For the table UI
- [react-beautiful-dnd](https://github.com/atlassian/react-beautiful-dnd): For drag and drop functionality
- [react-table-plugins](https://github.com/gargroh/react-table-plugins): For exporting data as PDF/XLSX

## Table of Contents 

- [Usage](#Usage)
    - [Specifying Data and Columns](#Data-and-Columns)
- [Workflow](#Workflow)
- [General Structure](#General-Structure)
    - [Toolbar](#Toolbar)
    - [Table](#Table-Body)
- [Exporting Data](#Exporting-Data)
- [Filtering](#Filtering)
    - [Creating Filters](#Creating-Filters)
- [Conditional Highlighting](#Conditional-Highlighting)
- [Row Buttons](#Row-Buttons)
- [Loading Indicator](#Loading-Indicator)
- [Moving Columns](#Moving-Columns)
- [Dates](#Dates)
- [Column Sort](#Column-Sort)
- [Visible Columns](#Visible-Columns)
- [Other Information](#Other-Information)


## Usage

The [Table](../../React/src/components/table/table.js) component involves:

- Preprocessing the table data (mainly for dates to be discussed below)
- Specifying parameters for each column for certain behaviour (filtering, sort type, display)
- Passing event handlers (add, edit, delete, conditionalActions), table titles, and data 
- Optionally specify whether the table is loading, if column widths should be fixed, error messages, and what the export file name should be

```javascript
    <Table data={tableData} tableColumns={tableColumns} title={tableTitle}         // Table column info, title, and data
           addHandler={addTableHandler} editHandler={editTableHandler}             // Event Handlers
           deleteHandler={deleteHandler} conditionalAction={conditionalActions}
           isLoading={tableLoading} isError={isErrorBool}                          // Optional
           saveName={'Export-File-Name'} />
```
### Data and Columns

The `data`for the table is an **array of objects**, where each object represents a row in the table.
Retrieving the values in a row is achieved by specifying the column names 

```javascript
import {FilterUIComponent} from 'path/components/table/filters';
import CellComponent from 'path/components/table/tableCells';

const tableColumns = [
    {...column1...},
    ...,
    {Header: 'Column Name Displayed', accessor: 'key name in data', Filter: FilterUIComponent, filter: 'predefined filter rule', FilterValue: variable, SetFilterValues: setVariable, Cell: CellComponent, sortType: 'alphanumeric', ConditionalHighlighting: conditionalHighlightingRule}
]
```

The `tableColumns` variable is an array of objects, where each object specifies how a column in the table will be displayed.
This includes: 

- `Header`: (String) What the column header will be displayed as 
- `accessor`: (String) Which key to refer to in the tableData 
- `Filter`: (React Component) (Optional) The UI for the filter for this column. The default only displays the data.
- `filter`: (String) Predefined filter rules (eg. filtter for values that match string or filter so values are between intervals)
- `Cell`: (React Component) (Optional) How each cell in the column should be displayed. By default only displays values.
- `sortType`: (String) (Optional) Either **alphanumeric** or specify your own sorting function (refer to the [Column Sort Section](#Column-Sort)). Specifies how sorting is done and default is **alphanumeric**.


## Workflow

This section provides a general checklist when adding a new table screen from scratch and can be used to identify potential causes of bugs or errors.
For more detail into some features of the table, refer to other topics below.

- Specify the `tableColumn`: Column headers, filter type, sorting type
- Define the default values when adding to a table, eg. UpdatedBy = WIN, as `defaultInput`. If a column header is missing, an error may occur.
- Define `input` with the `useInputState` hook,

```javascript
    const [input, setInput, setInputName, handleInputEvent] = useInputState(defaultInput);
```

which is used for adding or updating rows in the table and database

- Define `getTable`, `addHandler`, `editHandler` and `deleteHandler` where appropriate for retrieving the table and, adding, editing, and deleting features
- Define a `Modal` for displaying a modal where rows can be added or edited. **Note.** For *dropdowns*, the dropdown options are usually retrieved from the database.
- For date related columns, ensure that `input` stores dates in `DD/MM/YYYY` since this is sent to the database. 
Additionally, ensure that updated `input` values get converted to `Date objects` when updating the table.
For textfield onChange handlers involving dates, an additional dateHandler is usually neeed 

```javascript
    const dateJoiningHandler = (e) => { setInputName('DateJoining', inputToDate(e.currentTarget.value)) };
```

- Link loading indicator situations where appropriate with `isLoading`
- Add new screen to routes

## General Structure

The `Table` can be separated into two main components

- [Toolbar](#Toolbar): Contains buttons, such as export and add, title, and search.
- [Table](#Table): The main component for the table.

Formatting and styling is done using a combination of the default style of *Material UI* and additional CSS.

Typically, to add more logic and features to the `Table`, you would import a compatible hook such as 

```javascript 
    import { useTable,usePagination,useFilters,useGlobalFilter,useRowSelect,useColumnOrder,useSortBy } from 'react-table';
    import { useExportData } from 'react-table-plugins';
```

to construct a `react-table` instance including all the hooks needed to display the table and its logic

```javascript 
    const {getTableProps, getTableBodyProps, headerGroups, prepareRow, visibleColumns, exportData,
        page, gotoPage, setPageSize, // Paginate hooks
        preGlobalFilteredRows, setGlobalFilter, // Filter hooks
        setColumnOrder, allColumns, // Column drag and order
        state: { pageIndex, pageSize, selectedRowIds, globalFilter }} = useTable({
            columns: tableColumns, data: data, defaultColumn, initialState: initialPage, filterTypes, 
            editHandler, deleteHandler, conditionalAction, getExportFileBlob, getExportFileName},
        useColumnOrder, useFilters, useGlobalFilter, useSortBy, usePagination, useRowSelect, useExportData,
        hooks => {
            hooks.allColumns.push(columns => {
                if (CheckBoxComponent) {
                    return ([
                        {
                            id: 'CheckBox',
                            Header: ({ getToggleAllRowsSelectedProps }) => (null),
                            Cell: ({ row }) => (
                                <div>
                                    <CheckboxCell {...row.getToggleRowSelectedProps()} />
                                </div>),
                            Filter: ({ getToggleAllRowsSelectedProps }) => (
                                <div>
                                    <CheckboxCell {...getToggleAllRowsSelectedProps()} />   
                                </div>),
                        },
                        {
                            id: 'RowActions',
                            Header: () => ('Actions'),
                            Cell: ActionsCell,
                            Filter: FilterTitle,
                        },
                        ...columns
                    ])
                }
                else {
                    return ([
                        {
                            id: 'RowActions',
                            Header: () => ('Actions'),
                            Cell: ActionsCell,
                            Filter: FilterTitle,
                        },
                        ...columns
                    ])
                }
            })
        });
```

## Toolbar

The [ToolBar](../../React/src/components/table/toolbar.js) component is involved in filtering, displaying buttons, and displaying the 
table title.
Some features include:

- Setting table title.
- Displaying buttons for **add**, **export**, and addional buttons.
- Behaviour for checkbox mode.

## Table Body

The [Table](../../React/src/components/table/table.js) component is where the table is constructed and links with the `ToolBar`.
Since the `ToolBar` isn't exposed and only the `Table` component parameters are exposed, changes to the `ToolBar` UI based off 
external information, such as the screen name, requires passing information from the `Table` to the `ToolBar`.

This means **adding features to the toolbar** may require making changes to the `ToolBar` component along with changes to 
the `Table` component. 
See how `AdditionalButtons` is implemented in the [Table.js](../../React/src/components/table/table.js) file as an example.
Specifically, `AdditionalButtons` is a parameter in `Table` and is passed into `Toolbar` which also has an `AdditionalButtons` parameter.

## Exporting Data

Exporting data is done using the `react-table-plugin` package. 

- The function for generating the PDF/XLSX/CSV files is found in [export](../../React/src/components/table/export.js).
Additionally, the DCM logo is referred to in the code for the PDF.
- The function for specifying the save file name, `getExportFileName`, is found in [table](../../React/src/components/table/table.js).
- The UI buttons are displayed in the `ExportButton` component found in [table](../../React/src/components/table/table.
These buttons have a click event that runs `exportData` to generate the export file.
- `exportData` has the following arguments, `exportData('pdf|xlsx|csv', true|false)`.
The first argument specifies one of three file types while the second argument specifies whether the original unfiltered data (true) or filtered data (false) is used.


## Filtering

See the following for [Filtering Usage](3.1.Filtering.md).

## Creating Filters

In order to create filters, you must have a 

- Filter UI 
- Filtering Logic 

Additionally, they must be compatible (in some cases filter UI takes two values such as date range so filter logic must have two arguments etc).

### Filter UI

Filter UI components are found in the [Filter file](../../React/src/components/table/filters.js).

```javascript 
    const FilterUI = ({column: { filterValue = defaultValue, FilterValue, SetFilterValues,
  preFilteredRows, setFilter, id , setExtra},}) => {
      ...
        // Intermediary Logic
      ...
      return ( // React Component
          <FilterUI></FilterUI>
      )
  }
```
The parameters, `FilterValue` and `SetFilterValues`, are the variables referred to in `tableColumnn` meaning changes in the filter are exposed to the screen, such as getting dates when filter changes.

Additionally, the `defaultValue` can be a single value, NULL, or an array.

### Filter Logic

The filter logic is how values are filtered and found in [filterTypes](../../React/src/components/table/filterTypes.js).
These functions are of the form 

```javascript 
    const filterLogic = (rows, id, filterValue) => {
        ...
           // Filter Preprocessing
           // Eg. Find max or minimum

           // filterValue - this value is used for filtering. For example 
           //    > only take values less than filterValue 
           //    > only take values between filterValue[0] and filterValue[1]
           //    > only take values that include filterValue (eg. Text matching)
        ...
        return rows.filter(row => { // For each row, return true if keep, otherwise filter
            const rowValue = row.values[id];  // Specific column to check filter value against 
            ...
            return (true|false) // keep|filter out    
        })
    }
```

And additional optional rule that can be added onto the above example is 

```javascript 
    filterLogic.autoRemove = val => !val;
```

This **filters null** values.

**Note.** Filtering is specified by adding parameters to the `tableColumn`.

## Conditional Highlighting

Conditional highlighting can be specified in the `tableColumn` variable and requires a funcion that:

- returns a css class from [table.scss](../../React/src/components/table/table.scss)
- returns null

These functions for specifying conditional highlighting (highlighting specific rows in a column) are found 
in [conditionalHighlighting](../../React/src/components/table/conditionalHighlighting.js).

## Row Buttons

Row buttons, such as edit and delete, are generated from the following construction:

- The UI is defined in [tableCells](../../React/src/components/table/tableCells.js) called `ActionsCell`.
Additionally, the `TableCell` component has access to `editHandler`, `deleteHandler` and `conditionalAction` since, looking at [table](../../React/src/components/table/table.js), 
they are passed through via 

```javascript
    useTable({
            ...initialState: initialPage, editHandler, deleteHandler, conditionalAction...}, ...)
```

Hence, editing the row buttons stylistically involves editing the `ActionsCell` component.

## Loading Indicator

The loading indicator for the table is designed as follows:

- A loading UI, [CircleProgress](../../React/src/components/loadingIndicator/circularProgress.js), overlays the table when the table is loading
- The *loading state* of the table is specified by the `isLoading` parameter in `<Table>`. 

To use the loading functionality:

- Define a boolean `isLoading` variable for a screen/page and pass it to `<Table>`
- Set `isLoading` to `true` when loading, eg. sending a request, and set `isLoading` to `false` when not loading, eg. request finished.

The loading indicator can be changed by:

- Replacing the UI output of [CircleProgress](../../React/src/components/loadingIndicator/circularProgress.js) with another component
- Changing the overlay style, eg. white background to hide the table, can be done by changing the CSS class `loading-container` in [table.scss](../../React/src/components/table/table.scss)

## Moving Columns

The drag and drop feature of the table is achieved using the [react-beautiful-dnd](https://github.com/atlassian/react-beautiful-dnd) package.
This is done by wrapping the `TableRow` and `TableCell` components in `DragDropContext`, `Droppable`, and `Draggable` components defined in [react-beautiful-dnd](https://github.com/atlassian/react-beautiful-dnd).

## Dates

Dates require particular care and can cause numerous different errors due to the processing and formatting required.
Specifically, dates are represented in the following format for different scenarios :

- `DD/MM/YYYY`: Date format when sending and receiving from the database 
- `Date Object`: Format stored in `Table` in order to **filter** and **sort**
- `YYYY-MM-DD`: Date format for the `<Input>` tag used for updating or adding date values

Because dates are represented in three different ways, care must be taken to ensure when:

- Getting table data from the database, do the following conversion `DD/MM/YYYY -> Date Object`. If not, there may be errors in the filter or displaying the data with DateCell.
- Ensure when supplying values to `TextFields` that they are in `YYYY-MM-DD` format. If not, the field may not display anything. 

Since this conversion is frequently done, date related helper functions are defined in [dateHelpers](../../React/src/components/fields/dateHelpers.js).
In particular, `dateToDateObj`, `dateToDateObj`, `dateToInput`, and `inputToDate` are commonly used for conversion,
A workflow is described [above](#Workflow).

## Column Sort

Column sorting is implemented by including the `useSortBy` hook.
This allows columns to be sorted by **clicking** on the column header.
The type of sorting can be specified using the `sortType` parameter: 

- `dates`: allows sorting of datetime objects
- default: sorts alphanumerically

**Note.** For multi-sorting, hold **shift** and click multiple column headers.

## Visible Columns

A menu is shown in the toolbar which gives the user control on which columns are visible or not. 

```javascript
    <Modal title='Filter' showModal={showModal} setShowModal={setShowModal}
        buttonName={defaultColumnHideHandler ? 'Save' : null} onSubmit={updateDefaultCol} >
        {allColumns.map(column => {
            // Note. Menu for displaying which columns are visible via checkboxes
            if (column.id !== 'RowActions' && column.id !== 'CheckBox') {
                return (
                <div key={column.id}>
                    <label>
                    <input type="checkbox" {...column.getToggleHiddenProps()} />{' '}
                    {column.Header}
                    </label>
                </div>
                );
            }
            return null;
        })}
    </Modal>
```

To change the UI, replace the `<input>` tag with a different component or add a CSS class to it.

In order to hide certain columns by default, an array of strings can be parsed into `defaultColumnHide` in `<Table>`.
Additionally, an eventhandler can be passed to `<Table>`using the `defaultColumnHideHandler` parameter to update the default hidden columns.
This can be used to personalise the user's table viewing. 
**Note.** The eventhandler receives an array of ids (strings).


### Example. 

Example of default column input. 
This means `Serial ID` and `Start Date` default as inivisible.

```javascript
    defaultColumnHide = ['SerialId', 'StartDate']

```




## Other Information

Additional packages used.

- [react-beautiful-dnd](https://github.com/atlassian/react-beautiful-dnd): For drag and drop for lists in React.
- [react-table-plugins](https://github.com/gargroh/react-table-plugins): For exporting table data as PDF, CSV, or XLSX.















